Recommend protecting auth close to the resource (#3426)
clerkinc/clerk-docs: docs/guides/secure/protect-content.mdx

The following examples demonstrate both methods.

### Protect a page

<Tabs items={["auth.protect()", "auth()"]}>
  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/example/page.tsx' }}
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export default async function Page() {
      // Redirects to the sign-in route if the user is not signed in
      await auth.protect()

      return <h1>Hello world</h1>
    }
    ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/example/page.tsx' }}
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export default async function Page() {
      const { isAuthenticated, redirectToSignIn } = await auth()

      if (!isAuthenticated) {
        // Add logic to handle the unauthenticated user
        // This example uses the `redirectToSignIn()` method to redirect the user to the sign-in page
        return redirectToSignIn()
      }

      return <h1>Hello world</h1>
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

### Protect a layout

> You can run an auth check in a layout the same way as in a page, and you should if the layout itself reads privileged data (for example, when prefetching). But a layout check alone isn't enough: layouts don't re-render on client-side navigation, so the session isn't re-checked on every route change. Protect each page (and every other resource that reads or mutates data) directly, and treat a layout check as an addition, not a replacement. For more information, see the [Next.js docs](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/authentication#layouts-and-auth-checks).

Reviewer: No need to change anything here, but this formulation made me think we should sync on something:

> and you should if the layout itself reads privileged data

Say we have a `/dashboard/help` path or something. You can only visit the dashboard signed in, but this specific path only has static content. Maybe that content isn't even sensitive, it's kinda _fine_ if someone not signed in sees it.

I still believe that path should use `await auth.protect()` though. It's easier to reason about if all layouts/pages has that check, but it's also better UX.

So a tricky thing about `await auth.protect()` is that it's _also_ a UX affordance. Another example is, if we protect all API endpoints, server functions etc, there's technically no _security need_ for `await auth.protect()`, resources are protected, but we still want to include it so we:

* Redirect correctly instead of the app showing an error
* Avoid making those unnecessary API calls when we know they'll fail
* (Defence in depth)

I wanted to bring this up just so we are aligned that it has dual purposes.

      }

      return Response.json({ userId })
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

### Protect a Server Action

Server Actions run as API endpoints, so verify the user inside the action itself, before running any logic that depends on them being signed in.

<Tabs items={["auth.protect()", "auth()"]}>
  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/actions.ts' }}
    'use server'
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export async function createPost(formData: FormData) {
      // Redirects to the sign-in route if the user is not signed in
      const { userId } = await auth.protect()

      // Add your Server Action logic using the `userId`
    }
    ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/actions.ts' }}
    'use server'
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export async function createPost(formData: FormData) {
      const { isAuthenticated, userId } = await auth()

      if (!isAuthenticated) {
        // Add logic to handle the unauthenticated user:
        throw new Error('You must be signed in to create a post.')
      }

      // Add your Server Action logic using the `userId`
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Client-side

> On the client, you can read the `isSignedIn` property from the [`useAuth()`](/docs/reference/hooks/use-auth) or [`useUser()`](/docs/reference/hooks/use-user) hook to conditionally render UI based on whether the user is signed in.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should also mention the `<Show>` component here?

> [!WARNING]

> > A client-side check is a UX affordance, not a security boundary. By the time this code runs, the component has already been sent to the browser, so anything it contains is available to the user regardless of the check. Protect the data instead: guard the resources you pass to Client Components as props, and the Route Handlers or external API endpoints the client calls (see [Server-side](#server-side)).

Reviewer: I know this is pretty verbatim from what I said, but reading this part:

> Protect the data instead: guard the resources you pass to Client Components as props

I realize it's a bit fuzzy, it's not very clear guidance. This is essentially already what you are doing by protecting the server components.

Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
> A client-side check is a UX affordance, not a security boundary. By the time this code runs, the component has already been sent to the browser, so anything it contains is available to the user regardless of the check. 
>
> Protect the data instead: guard Route Handlers, Server Functions and external API endpoints the client calls, and by protecting the Server Components, you also guard any resources passed down as props to the client (see [Server-side](#server-side)).
```

---
title: Protect content from unauthenticated users
description: Learn how to protect pages, Route Handlers, and Server Actions from unauthenticated users in your Clerk + Next.js application.
sdk: nextjs
---

This guide demonstrates how to protect pages, Route Handlers, and Server Actions from unauthenticated users in your Next.js application.

> [!TIP]
> To check whether a user is [**authorized** (has a specific Role, Permission, Feature, or Plan)](!authorization-check) in addition to being signed in, see [Authorization checks](/docs/guides/secure/authorization-checks). This guide focuses on **authentication** (whether a user is signed in).

> 

Reviewer: I think this page should start with a checklist. To protect your application, you need to protect the following resources:

* Server Components
  * Layouts, Pages etc
* Route handlers
  * Internal Next API endpoints
* Server Actions
  * We need to explain these are also API endpoints
* External API endpoints
  * This one is missing in a huge way here

Reviewer 2: fixed here by jacek! [15d7992](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/3426/commits/15d79927f7c5750d994994466b4ba5ee8b0298d9)

The following examples demonstrate both methods.

### Protect a page

<Tabs items={["auth.protect()", "auth()"]}>
  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/example/page.tsx' }}
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export default async function Page() {
      // Redirects to the sign-in route if the user is not signed in
      await auth.protect()

      return <h1>Hello world</h1>
    }
    ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/example/page.tsx' }}
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export default async function Page() {
      const { isAuthenticated, redirectToSignIn } = await auth()

      if (!isAuthenticated) {
        // Add logic to handle the unauthenticated user
        // This example uses the `redirectToSignIn()` method to redirect the user to the sign-in page
        return redirectToSignIn()
      }

      return <h1>Hello world</h1>
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

### Protect a layout

> It's not recommended to perform authentication checks in a layout. Layouts don't re-render on client-side navigation, so the session isn't re-checked on every route change. For more information, see the [Next.js docs](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/authentication#layouts-and-auth-checks).

Reviewer: This is wrong. Since you can access privileged resources in a layout as well (see prefetching in the dashboard for example), you _also_ have to protect layouts. This is correct in that you can't _only_ protect layouts though.

I think I'd merge layouts+pages and make a note that it's not enough to protect only the layouts.

Reviewer 2: ahhh interesting!! TIL.
fixed here by jacek! [15d7992](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/3426/commits/15d79927f7c5750d994994466b4ba5ee8b0298d9)

Reviewer: The Next.js model is very tricky to get a 100% right, and it's hard to catch when you do it wrong which makes our job harder. 😬

That's one reason we want to encode it in a lint rule too.

        return Response.json({ error: 'Unauthorized' }, { status: 401 })
      }

      return Response.json({ userId })
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

### Protect a Server Action

Verify the user inside the action itself, before running any logic that depends on them being signed in.

<Tabs items={["auth.protect()", "auth()"]}>
  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/actions.ts' }}
    'use server'
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export async function createPost(formData: FormData) {
      // Returns a `404` error for unauthenticated requests
      const { userId } = await auth.protect()

      // Add your Server Action logic using the `userId`
    }
    ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>
    ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/actions.ts' }}
    'use server'
    import { auth } from '@clerk/nextjs/server'

    export async function createPost(formData: FormData) {
      const { isAuthenticated, userId } = await auth()

      if (!isAuthenticated) {
        // Add logic to handle the unauthenticated user:
        throw new Error('You must be signed in to create a post.')
      }

      // Add your Server Action logic using the `userId`
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

## Client-side

> You can use the `isSignedIn` property from the [`useAuth()`](/docs/reference/hooks/use-auth) or [`useUser()`](/docs/reference/hooks/use-user) hook to protect your Client Components from unauthenticated users.

Reviewer: I think we need to make it clear that this is not actually _protecting_ anything. It's potentially already rendering on the client when you hit this code, so everything is going to be available to an attacker anyway. This is more of a UX thing really.

The way to protect the client is to protect:

* The resources that are passed down to client components as props
* The external resources the client calls, like API endpoints

Reviewer 2: fixed here by jacek! [15d7992](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/3426/commits/15d79927f7c5750d994994466b4ba5ee8b0298d9)

<CodeBlockTabs options={["useAuth()", "useUser()"]}>
  ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/example/page.tsx' }}
  'use client'

  import { useAuth } from '@clerk/nextjs'

  export default function Page() {
    const { isLoaded, isSignedIn } = useAuth()

    // Handle loading state
    if (!isLoaded) return <h1>Loading...</h1>

    if (!isSignedIn) {
      // Add logic to handle the unauthenticated user
      // This example renders a UI but you could also redirect to the sign-in page instead
      return <h1>You must be signed in to view this page</h1>
    }

    return <h1>Hello world</h1>
  }
  ```

  ```tsx {{ filename: 'app/example/page.tsx' }}
  'use client'

  import { useUser } from '@clerk/nextjs'

  export default function Page() {
    const { isSignedIn, isLoaded } = useUser()

    // Handle loading state
    if (!isLoaded) return <h1>Loading...</h1>

    if (!isSignedIn) {
      // Add logic to handle the unauthenticated user
      // This example renders a UI but you could also redirect to the sign-in page instead
      return <h1>You must be signed in to view this page</h1>
    }

    return <h1>Hello world</h1>
  }
  ```
</CodeBlockTabs>

> ## Migrating from middleware-based auth checks

Reviewer: This section plus removing everything from the `clerkMiddleware` page is essentially the same as deprecating it now, just without the actual deprecation.

I think we should save these parts for later, this migration guide is going to take a lot of work to get right, and while this is a good foundation, I think we need some better support like the lint rule and codemod for this to be truly complete.

Auth checks inside `clerkMiddleware()` are no longer recommended. Middleware is the wrong layer to decide who may see a resource: to gate a route there, Clerk has to match the request URL the same way your framework and host route it, which means maintaining a second model of your routes, separate from the pages, handlers, and actions they map to. That model has to stay in sync as routes, rewrites, and hosting change, and when it drifts, the check can fail to apply where you intend.

**Protect access as close to the resource as possible**, where you read or mutate the data. This way, the same code that touches the data also enforces who can reach it.

> If you're currently protecting routes in `clerkMiddleware()`, move the auth check into the resource itself and remove it from `clerkMiddleware()`. **You still need to keep `clerkMiddleware()` as it's required for Clerk configuration and can still be used for things like redirects, headers, and other request handling.** Cross-cutting redirects (incomplete [session tasks](/docs/guides/configure/session-tasks), [onboarding](/docs/guides/development/add-onboarding-flow)) can stay in middleware as a redirect convenience, as long as the real enforcement also runs at the resource. For [checking authorization](!authorization-check) (Roles, Permissions, Features, or Plans), see the [Authorization checks](/docs/guides/secure/authorization-checks) guide.

Reviewer: > Cross-cutting redirects (incomplete [session tasks](/docs/guides/configure/session-tasks), [onboarding](/docs/guides/development/add-onboarding-flow)) can stay in middleware as a redirect convenience, as long as the real enforcement also runs at the resource. 

Can it though? If those can stay (that are essentially auth guards too), why can't other auth guards stay? This is something we need a better grasp on for sure, I hadn't considered these cases tbh, let's discuss!
